Before we move on to the next lecture, I just want to compare the var and let key word again quickly,
I want to drive this point home and it will help you with coding, I promise.
Let's define an age
of two.
And remember when I do this with the var keyword, I'm creating a global
scope variable.
Now, this is what I want to do. If the warthog is older than one year old,
I want to console.log to the screen, the equivalent human years of that warthog.
What I mean? Well, a warthog lives for about 18 years, and if we just say a human lives 100 years,
I know that's too long, but just say the average human lives 100 years,
what that means is that for every one warthog year, it's the equivalent 4.72 human
years.
And I just want to console log that to the screen.
So let's say
age is greater than one, because we only want to do this if the warthog is older than one year. And now,
I want to create a variable which is the human age equivalent, which we said is just going to be the
age of the warthog multiplied by 100,
if we take that as the average lifespan of a human, divided by 18, which is the average lifespan of
a warthog.
And then we want to console.log to the screen
and here I'm going to be using Template Literals.
A two year warthog
is
years old in human terms.
And this is what's nice about Quokka,
you can see the output is immediately being displayed to the right , in blue text.
And this is what I wanna get to now - comparing var versus let. Remember, we said var is only
function scoped.
So if I try and access humanAge, what do you think will happen here?
humanAge?
Well, this is not a function, is it?
It's just a block.
It's not a function, so I would expect humanAge to be visible everywhere with the var keyword.
humanAge.
And it is. It's here and it outputs the result to the screen.
But what about if I change this "var" to a "let"?
Well, let is block scoped, so I would expect humanAge to not be defined.
We are unable to use it outside that block.
But you already knew this, didn't you?
So let's step it up a notch, let's try and create a nested block and then let's see what happens.
So, let's delete this.
Let's create a function called variableScope,
for lack of a better word, you can call it anything you want.
And straight off the bat, let's define a variable called "x", and let's make that a number.
Now, what I want to do is create a nested block.
We'll do a simple IF statement that will execute because we're just passing the boolean true. And if it
is true
I wanna create a variable, but get this,
I want the variable name to be the same
"x".
And let's say that must be "Wally".
This is a string. So you can already see that we've got two variables now that shouldn't technically
be allowed if they were in the same scope.
One's a number. One's a string.
But let's see what happens.
All I want to do now is console lox "x"
within this block.
Now I want to exit the block,
and I want to console log "x" again.
And the last thing I want to do is console log "x" again, let me just stop Quokka for the moment because
I want you to think about the result here. Console log "x".
And here's my question to you, and I'll only give you the answer in a few seconds, I want you to pause
the video and think about it.
We've got 3 console logs on the screen.
What will the result of each of those logs be?
Think about scopes.
Think about block scopes.
Think about function scopes.
Pause the video now, give it a go, and then I'll answer the question shortly.
(music starts)
I hope you gave that a go.
I hope you had fun.
I hope you're enjoying it.
And don't be intimidated by this all. I mean, it's fun, you know, and if you don't know the answers,
that's totally fine.
That's why we're doing the course together.
OK, so before I start up Quokka, let's just run through it. We've got a function and remember the let variable
is function scoped.
That means that any variable defined in that function is not accessible outside that function.
That's the first thing I want you to think about.
So this "console.log(x)", is that in the function or out the function? It's out the function.
So when the parser comes through and it looks at that "x", is it going to find anything?
No, it's not, because that "x" is not found in the global scope.
So I would expect this last console.log to display undefined.
What about the first console?
Well, remember, we said that the let variable is block scoped?
That means you can treat that IF block as its own section of code and only that section can access
that variable.
So what do I mean by that?
Well, we've defined "x" within that scope, and then we've console logged "x".
So I'd expect the "x" to be Wally.
Now let's go onto the middle console log.
We've jumped out of that IF block.
So which block are we in? Well, we're in the function block again.
And that means we have defined "x" as 10, and now we're console logging 10.
I would expect the result 10.
Let's see if this works.
Let me activate Quokka.
Let's give it a moment.
So you can see Quokka is already saying that "x" is not defined out here, which is what we expected.
The reason why we're not seeing anything excluded here
is we haven't run the function.
And remember to run a function, we have to call the (function) name,
and enclose it in brackets. There you go.
And it's literally given us what we would expect.
Hope its starting to feel intuitive.
Let's continue.